Panama, officially the Republic of Panama (Spanish: República de Panamá; Spanish
pronunciation: []), is the southernmost country of Central America. Situated on
an isthmus, some categorize it as a transcontinental nation connecting the north
and south part of America. It is bordered by Costa Rica to the north-west,
Colombia to the south-east, the Caribbean Sea to the north and the Pacific Ocean
to the south. It is an international business center and is also a transit
country. Although Panama is also the third largest economy in Central America,
after Guatemala and Costa Rica, it has the largest expenditure on resource
consumption, making the country the largest consumer in Central America.

Pre-Columbian heritage of native populations whose presence stretched back over
11,000 years. The earliest traces of these indigenous peoples include fluted
projectile points. This changed into significant populations that are best known
through the spectacular burials of the Conte site (dating to c. AD 500–900) and
the polychrome pottery of the Coclé style. The monumental monolithic sculptures
at the Barriles (Chiriqui) site were another important clue of the ancient
isthmian cultures. Prior to the arrival of Europeans, Panama was widely settled
by Chibchan, Chocoan, and Cueva peoples, among whom the largest group were the
Cueva. There is no accurate knowledge of size of the indigenous population of
the isthmus at the time of the European conquest. Estimates range as high as two
million people, but more recent studies place that number closer to 200,000.

 Colonial Panama: discovery, conquest and decay

Christopher Columbus arrives in Panama on his fourth travel, which started in
Nicaragua and ended in Panama. It is in this trip he discovers the Chagres
river, which in the 20th Century it would be the main resource to build the
Panama Canal. He arrived to the Caribbean coast where he baptized the area with
the name of Portobelo (in English, Beautiful Port). Columbus then explored
Veraguas and founded Santa Maria de Belen, which would be the first Spanish
settlement on the continent, leaving Bartolome, his brother, in charge.

Eventually, this settlement was destroyed by the local native population and the
few surviving members returned to Spain.

 Founding of Panama La Vieja

It wasn´t until 1519 when the Spanish decided to settle the new city. This time
they chose a site in the Pacific ocean, which was discovered six years before by
Vasco Nuñez de Balboa. The new city, today known as Panama La Vieja, was founded
in August 15th, 1519 by orders of governor Pedrarias Davila and became an
important port during the Spanish gold trade from Peru to the Caribbean islands
and finally to Europe. The merchandise from all over South America would come
into Panama and travel to Portobelo using the Camino de Cruces (old stone road)
crossing the jungle and navigating the Chagres river. From Portobelo it would
distribute to the islands and then to Spain.

Because of its importance and its location the city was an easy target for
pirates. However, protection from pirates was only one of its many problems, as
it was settled in a site composed mainly by mangrove land, diseases and fires
weakened their position, until it was finally destroyed by pirate Henry Morgan
in 1671.

 Founding of Casco Antiguo

In 1673 a new city of Panama was founded. This time, a rocky peninsula was
chosen, still on the Pacific side. A healthier site with crossed winds and
easier to defend from both land and ocean attacks. Called interchangeably Casco
Viejo, San Felipe, Catedral or , it is from here where Panama would declare
independece from Spain and later join and separate from Colombia. It will see
the boom and bust of the Gold Rush, the French attempt to build a Canal and
later its completion by the United States.

 Independence


After about 320 years under the rule of the Spanish Empire, on 10 November 1821,
independence from Spain was declared in the small town of La Villa, today known
as La Heroica. On 28 November, presided by Colonel Jose de Fabrega, a National
Assembly was convened and it officially declared the independence of the isthmus
of Panama from Spain and its decision to join New Granada, Ecuador and Venezuela
in Bolivar's recently founded Republic of Colombia.

In 1830, Venezuela, Ecuador and other territories left the Gran Colombia, but
Panama remained as a province of this country, until July 1831 when the isthmus
reiterated its independence, now under General Juan Eligio Alzuru as supreme
military commander. In August, military forces under the command of Colonel
Tomás Herrera defeated and executed Alzuru and reestablished ties with New
Granada.

Ten years later, on November 1840, during a civil war that had begun as a
religious conflict, the isthmus declared its independence under the leadership
of the now General Tomás Herrera and became the 'Estado Libre del Istmo', or the
Free State of the Isthmus. The new state established external political and
economic ties and drew up a constitution which included the possibility for
Panama to rejoin New Granada, but only as a federal district. On June 1841 Tomás
Herrera became the President of the Estado Libre del Istmo. But the civil
conflict ended and the government of New Granada and the government of the
Isthmus negotiated the reincorporation of Panamá to Colombia on December 31,
1841.

In the end, the union between Panama and the Republic of Colombia was made
possible by the active participation of the US under the 1846 Bidlack Mallarino
Treaty, which lasted until 1903. The treaty granted the US rights to build
railroads through Panama and to intervene militarily against revolt to guarantee
New Granadine control of Panama. There were at least three attempts by
Panamanian Liberals to seize control of Panama and potentially achieve full
autonomy, including one led by Liberal guerrillas like Belisario Porras and
Victoriano Lorenzo, each of which was suppressed by a collaboration of
Conservative Colombian and US forces under the Bidlack Mallarino Treaty.

In 1902 US President Theodore Roosevelt decided to take on the abandoned works
of the Panama Canal by the French but the Colombian government in Bogotá balked
at the prospect of a US controlled canal under the terms that Roosevelt's
administration was offering. Roosevelt was unwilling to alter its terms and
quickly changed tactics, encouraging a minority of Conservative Panamanian
landholding families to demand independence, offering military support. On
November 3, 1903 Panama finally separated and Dr. Manuel Amador Guerrero, a
prominent member of the Conservative political party, became the first
constitutional President of the Republic of Panama.

In November 1903, Phillipe Bunau-Varilla—a French citizen who was not authorized
to sign any treaties on behalf of Panama without the review of the
Panamanians—unilaterally signed the Hay-Bunau Varilla Treaty which granted
rights to the US to build and administer indefinitely the Panama Canal, which
was opened in 1914. This treaty became a contentious diplomatic issue between
the two countries, reaching a boiling point on Martyr's Day (9 January 1964).
The issues were resolved with the signing of the Torrijos-Carter Treaties in
1977 returning the former Canal Zone territories to Panama.

 Military dictators

The second intent of the founding fathers was to bring peace and harmony between
the two major political parties (Conservatives and Liberals). The Panamanian
government went through periods of political instability and corruption,
however, and at various times in its history, the mandate of an elected
president terminated prematurely. In 1968, a coup toppled the government of the
recently elected President Arnulfo Arias Madrid.

While never holding the position of President himself, General Omar Torrijos
eventually became the de facto leader of Panama. As a military dictator, he was
the leading power in the governing military junta and later became an autocratic
strong man. Torrijos maintained his position of power until his death in an
airplane accident in 1981.

After Torrijos's death, several military strong men followed him as Panama's
leader. Commander Florencio Flores Aguilar followed Torrijos. Colonel Rubén
Darío Paredes followed Aguilar. Eventually, by 1983, power was concentrated in
the hands of General Manuel Antonio Noriega.

Manuel Noriega came up through the ranks after serving in the Chiriquí province
and in the city of Puerto Armuelles for a time. He was a former head of Panama's
secret police and was an ex-informant of the CIA. But Noriega's implication in
drug trafficking by the United States resulted in difficult relations by the end
of the 1980s.

 United States invasion of Panama

On 20 December 1989, 27,000 U.S. personnel invaded Panama in order to remove
Manuel Noriega. A few hours before the invasion, in a ceremony that took place
inside a U.S. military base in the former Panama Canal Zone, Guillermo Endara
was sworn in as the new President of Panama. The invasion occurred ten years
before the Panama Canal administration was to be turned over to Panamanian
authorities, according to the timetable set up by the Torrijos-Carter Treaties.
During the fighting, between two hundred  and four thousand Panamanians, mostly
civilians, were killed.

Noriega surrendered to the American military shortly after, and was taken to
Florida to be formally extradited and charged by U.S. federal authorities on
drug and racketeering charges. He became eligible for parole on September 9,
2007, but remained in custody while his lawyers fought an extradition request
from France. Critics have pointed out that many of Noriega's former allies
remain in power in Panama.

 Post-invasion

Under the Torrijos-Carter Treaties, the United States turned over all canal-
related lands to Panama on 31 December 1999. Panama also gained control of
canal-related buildings and infrastructure as well as full administration of the
canal.

The people of Panama have already approved the widening of the canal which,
after completion, will allow for post-Panamax vessels to travel through it,
increasing the number of ships that currently use the canal.

 Politics

Panama's politics takes place in a framework of a presidential representative
democratic republic, whereby the President of Panama is both head of state and
head of government, and of a multi-party system. Executive power is exercised by
the government. Legislative power is vested in both the government and the
National Assembly. The judiciary is independent of the executive and the
legislature. All National elections are universal and mandatory to all citizens
18 years and older.

 Provinces and regions

 Geography

Panama is located in Central America, bordering both the Caribbean Sea and the
Pacific Ocean, between Colombia and Costa Rica. Its location on the Isthmus of
Panama is strategic. By 2000, Panama controlled the Panama Canal that links the
North Atlantic Ocean via the Caribbean Sea with the North Pacific Ocean.

The dominant feature of the country's landform is the central spine of mountains
and hills that forms the continental divide. The divide does not form part of
the great mountain chains of North America, and only near the Colombian border
are there highlands related to the Andean system of South America. The spine
that forms the divide is the highly eroded arch of an uplift from the sea
bottom, in which peaks were formed by volcanic intrusions.

The mountain range of the divide is called the Cordillera de Talamanca near the
Costa Rican border. Farther east it becomes the Serranía de Tabasará, and the
portion of it closer to the lower saddle of the isthmus, where the canal is
located, is often called the Sierra de Veraguas. As a whole, the range between
Costa Rica and the canal is generally referred to by Panamanian geographers as
the Cordillera Central.

The highest point in the country is the Volcán Barú (formerly known as the
Volcán de Chiriquí), which rises to 3475 meters (11401 ft). A nearly
impenetrable jungle forms the Darien Gap between Panama and Colombia. It creates
a break in the Pan-American Highway, which otherwise forms a complete road from
Alaska to Patagonia.

 Economy

According to the CIA World Factbook, Panama has an unemployment rate of 6.4% and
according to the ECLAC, the poverty rate is of 40% as of 2006, comparable to
that of wealthier nations such as Argentina. However, the Third World
infrastructure and low standards of living shows Panama's weakening and troubled
economic at a very low point in history.

Panama's economy is mainly service-based, heavily weighted toward banking,
commerce, tourism, trading and private industries because of its key geographic
location. Another factor that have caused many problems to this already troubled
economy is the overwhelming increase in criminal activities throughout the
country specially in the city, from murders, arm robberies, rapes to careless
car accidents all over the country. The handover of the canal and military
installations by the United States has given rise to some construction projects.
The Martín Torrijos administration has undertaken controversial structural
reforms, such as a fiscal reform and a very difficult Social Security Reform.
Furthermore, a referendum regarding the building of a third set of locks for the
Panama Canal was approved overwhelmingly (though with low voter turnout) on 22
October 2006. The official estimate of the building of the third set of locks is
US$5.25 billion.

The Panamanian currency is the balboa, fixed at parity with the United States
dollar. In practice, however, the country is dollarized; Panama mints its own
coinage but uses US dollars for all its paper currency. Panama was the first of
the three countries in Latin America to have dollarized their economies, later
followed by Ecuador and El Salvador.

 Globalization

The high levels of Panamanian trade are in large part from the Colón Free Trade
Zone, the largest free trade zone in the Western Hemisphere. Last year the zone
accounted for 92% of Panama's exports and 64% of its imports, according to an
analysis of figures from the Colon zone management and estimates of Panama's
trade by the United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and the
Caribbean (ECLAC). Panama's economy is also very much supported by the trade and
exportation of coffee.

 Inflation

According to the Economic Commission for Latin American and the Caribbean
(ECLAC, or CEPAL by its more-commonly used Spanish acronym), Panama's inflation
as measured by weight CPI was 2.0 percent in 2006. Panama has traditionally
experienced low inflation.

 Real estate

Panama City was experiencing a real estate boom until recently. Tourists and
retirees were arriving in greater quantities and consequently helping the local
real estate market. Close to twenty-thousand Americans were choosing Panama as
their retirement home in the upcoming years and this will be key in the
development for the country which already has about three million people. A hot
and humid weather and not to low of a cost of living along with an unstable
economy have served as difficult points for this once promising market. The
government of Panama has made many attempts to put together a very liberal
package for the retirees offering tax exemptions, discounts on transportation
and meals with no positive results.

Apart from the existing demand, future developments may be helped by such
factors as the planned expansion of the Panama Canal.

 Tourism

Along with real estate, tourism is one of Panama´s rising economic activities.
Small and amazingly diverse, Panama makes it possible for a traveler to visit
not only two different oceans in one day, but be able to combine in less than a
week a diversified natural experience (white sand beaches, cloud or rain forest,
mountains or valleys) with a wide range of cultural experiences (seven Indian
tribes, Afroantillian and Spanish Colonial culture, several historic monuments
and a 300 year old World Heritage Site called Casco Antiguo (often referred as
Casco Viejo, Panama Viejo, San Felipe or Catedral) ). In recent years the North
Western and North Eastern regions of Panama have drawn increasing amounts of
tourism to the beaches, rain forests and Caribbean areas all within easy reach
of popular Costa Rica. Bocas Del Toro, Boquete, and the surfing areas of the
west coast are now huge tourist draws. David has become a cross roads for
backpacking international tourists and has seen an increase in backpacker
hostels. In the city of Panama visitors can spot an interesting Native American
group. This group usually includes older women covered in colorful beads and
decorative paintings on their faces. Besides spotting the natives, there is a
resort called Decameron that brings visitors from all around the world. This
resort contains an open bar, and a few buffet-style dining areas. Aerobic and
scuba classes can be taken while visiting the resort.

 Bilateral Investment Treaty with the U.S.

The Bilateral Investment Treaty (BIT) between the governments of the United
States and Panama was signed on October 27, 1982. The treaty protects U.S.
investment and assists Panama in its efforts to develop its economy by creating
conditions more favorable for U.S. private investment and thereby strengthening
the development of its private sector. The BIT with Panama was the first such
treaty signed by the U.S. in the Western Hemisphere.

The importance of Panama to the U.S. stems from the Panama Canal which was built
by the U.S. during the period of 1904–1914. Previously, if ships wanted to pass
through the Americas, they would have to go all the way around the most southern
tip of South America, the Tierra del Fuego, and through the Drake Passage. The
Panama Canal connects the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans directly at the narrowest
point in Panama. When previously a ship going from New York to San Francisco
would have to travel for 20,900 kilometers (13,000 miles), now that travel time
would be reduced to 8370 km (5200 mi).

The canal is of economic importance since it provides millions of dollars from
toll revenue as well as a right to include and exclude any other nation or
company from using it. The United States had complete monopoly over the Panama
Canal for 85 years. However, the Torrijos-Carter Treaties signed in 1977 began
the process of returning the canal to the Panamanian government in 1999 as long
as they agreed to the neutrality of the canal, as well as allowing the U.S. to
return at any time.

 Proposed Free Trade Agreement with the United States

A Trade Promotion Agreement between the United States and Panama was signed by
both governments in 2007, but neither country has yet approved or implemented
the Agreement. While the U.S. Congress was initially favorably disposed to the
Panama pact, the election of the anti-American Pedro González, and his possible
link with to the assassination of US soldier Zak Hernández, to the presidency of
the Panamanian legislature on September 1, 2007 has halted progress of the pact
in that body.

 Demographics

According to the CIA World Factbook, Panama has a population of 3,309,679. The
majority of the population, 70% is mestizo. The rest is 14% Amerindian and mixed
West Indian, 10% white and 6% Amerindian. The Amerindian population includes
seven indigenous peoples, the Emberá, Wounaan, Guaymí, Buglé, Kuna, Naso and
Bribri. More than half the population lives in the Panama City–Colón
metropolitan corridor.

The culture, customs, and language of the Panamanians are predominantly
Caribbean and Spanish. Spanish is the official and dominant language. About 40
percent of the population speak creole, mostly in Panama City and in the islands
off the northeast coast. English is spoken widely on the Caribbean coast and by
many in business and professional fields.

Panama, because of its historical reliance on commerce, is above all a melting
pot. This is shown, for instance, by its considerable population of Chinese
origin. Many Chinese immigrated to Panama from southern China to help build the
Panama Railroad in the 19th century; their descendants number around 50,000.
Starting in the 1970s, a further 80,000 have immigrated from other parts of
mainland China as well.

The country is also the smallest in Spanish-speaking Latin America in terms of
population (est. 3,232,000), with Uruguay as the second smallest (est.
3,463,000). However, since Panama has a higher birth rate, it is likely that in
the coming years its population will surpass Uruguay's.

 Religion

The overwhelming majority of Panamanians are Roman Catholic – various sources
estimate that 75 to 85 percent of the population identifies itself as Roman
Catholic and 15 to 25 percent as evangelical Christian. The Bahá'í Faith
community of Panama is estimated at 2.00% of the national population, or about
60,000 including about 10% of the Guaymí population and the Bahá'ís maintain one
of the world's seven Baha'i Houses of Worship in Panama which is perched on a
high hill facing the canal, and is constructed of local mud bricks laid in a
pattern reminiscent of Native American fabric designs. Smaller religious groups
include Jewish and Muslim communities with approximately 10,000 members each,
and small groups of Hindus, Buddhists and Rastafarians. Indigenous religions
include Ibeorgun (among Kuna) and Mamatata (among Ngobe).

The Jewish community in Panama, with over 10,000 members, is by far the biggest
in the region (including Central America and the Caribbean). Jewish immigration
began in the late 19th century, and at present there are three synagogues in
Panama City, as well as four Jewish schools. Within Latin America, Panama has
one of the largest Jewish communities in proportion to its population, surpassed
only by Uruguay, Argentina, Brazil, and Mexico. Panama is also the first country
in Latin America to have a Jewish president, Eric Arturo Delvalle.